---
layout: post


title: Change in Coal Production in Afghanistan since 2000
description: Coal Production in Afghanistan has skyrocketed since the beginning of the U.S. invasion in 2000.

author: kat lonsdorf
email: klonsdorf@gmail.com
twitter: lilkat_bigworld
---

## Coal Production in Afghanistan Skyrocketed After U.S. Invasion

Coal production in Afghanistan rose dramatically following the beginning of the U.S. war in 2001, according to an industrial commodity statistics database put together by the United Nations.  Prior to the war, coal production in the country was nearly negligible.

From the 1995 until 2000, yearly coal production in Afghanistan was at 5,000 metric tons or less—far less than neighboring Pakistan, a country with relatively similar resources and geology.  However, Afghan coal production jumped by 2,500 percent in 2001, coinciding with the start of the U.S.-led invasion.  

Since then, production continued to increase, jumping by nearly 600 percent again in 2007.  By 2013, the last year of data available in the database, coal production in Afghanistan had increased by well over 100,000 percent since 2000. 

By comparison, Pakistan’s coal production dropped by over 30 percent during the same time period.  Coal production in major players like the United Kingdom and the United States also dropped by nearly 60 percent and 20 percent, respectively—although Afghanistan’s overall coal production was still a fraction of either of those countries.  

(It should be noted that the scale on each graph below is different.)

<iframe width="620" height="400" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/18ugbv9dVpJvHNF_aAAmcsrqmDZnVhL2jAPWuWmQs8xI/pubchart?oid=623361769&amp;format=image"></iframe>

<iframe width="620" height="400" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/18ugbv9dVpJvHNF_aAAmcsrqmDZnVhL2jAPWuWmQs8xI/pubchart?oid=1746423817&amp;format=image"></iframe>

<iframe width="620" height="400" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/18ugbv9dVpJvHNF_aAAmcsrqmDZnVhL2jAPWuWmQs8xI/pubchart?oid=6770830&amp;format=image"></iframe>

<iframe width="620" height="400" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/18ugbv9dVpJvHNF_aAAmcsrqmDZnVhL2jAPWuWmQs8xI/pubchart?oid=492114279&amp;format=image"></iframe>

It seems the increase in coal production in the country is directly related to the U.S. invasion. 

I dug into it a bit, and Afghanistan has been eyed by the international community for its mineral-rich geology for quite a while.  A <a href="http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/Pnabl961.pdf"> study by the Agency of International Development in 1992 </a> highlights the multiple countries that have had interest in Afghanistan’s mineral deposits, including the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union.

Afghanistan’s rough terrain and even rougher political history have made the development of its mining industry—especially coal—pretty tough.  The Soviet Union made a good headway into developing coal and other mineral production in Afghanistan for its own benefit, creating detailed maps of mineral deposits in the country.

When the Taliban came to power in 1979, Afghan Ministry of Mining officials reportedly hid the maps, fearing what the Taliban would do if they knew the country had so much wealth.  It wasn’t until after the U.S. invaded in 2001 that the maps resurfaced, although I haven’t been able to find out specific details about how that happened.  
